---
layout: post-light-feature
title: My experiments with Indian classical music
description: >-
  Using a combination of tools to automate the creation of time-frequency videos
  that help visualize complex musical phrases and passages
categories: articles
date: {}
image:
  feature: KeralaSmall.jpg
published: true
---
From age zero to five, I lived with my parents in Saudi Arabia. We moved there from Bombay the year that I was conceived, first as an idea in my sister's head, then carefully forged by my parents. Fragmented memories of my time there as a toddler remain uncolored by the strong feelings I later developed for the life my mother lead there, a life of being swathed in black and exchanging liberty and independence for family and financial security. There wasn't much to do in the way of entertainment, and over the weekends my father would frequently take us all on long drives cross-country that sometimes lasted several days. Outside the window of our Datsun were miles of endless desert, shifting dunes sometimes peppered with camels and rarely, the camps of Bedouins. Inside the bubble of the car I remember the comfort of my mothers soft hair, cool AC air, and who I later learned were Olivia Newton John and Madonna on auto-replay. 

On our annual visits to India I was terrified by the crowdedness of everything. We rode in odd suitcases called autorickshaws, everyone far too close to everyone else. It was bad enough that there were so many people, but there was so much interacting to do - opening the door for the postman/milkman/electrician/newspaperman, getting to know all my relatives who were so kind and familiar without my understanding how, watching my cousins all belong to Bombay and to each other in a way I never felt I would. It was in the background of this mayhem that I first listened to Khayal, noisy at first when slow and noisier later when it got fast. I dismissed it without pause.

Many of the features that make Khayal a rapturous, spiritual experience for afficionados also make it hard to listen to for the unexposed or westernized ear. It has a steep learning curve, one that the majority of its audience are not even aware of, learning as by osmosis within a subculture in which this music permeates their lives. Musical structure is heavily rule based, and the methodical improvisation that characterizes most performances is only appreciated with at least some knowledge of the rules. In this way, the genre is a sport, with discerning audience members according points via verbal affirmations like "wah wah" (wow!), "kya baat hai" (what a *thing* you just did!) and "shabash!" (bravo!) when a musician executes a musical phrase that is pleasing or creative but also works within the framework accorded by the rules of the piece.

I began studying Khayal seriously about five years ago, as a way to remain connected to a friend who loved the genre and who I was in the process of losing to cancer. 
